Rate of Change of Frequency
(ROCOF) withstand capability

ENTSO-E guidance document for national
implementation for network codes on grid connection

29 March 2017

ENTSO-E AISBL · Avenue de Cortenbergh 100 · 1000 Brussels · Belgium · Tel + 32 2 741 09 50 · Fax + 32 2 741 09 51 · info@entsoe.eu · www. entsoe.eu
Rate of Change of Frequency (ROCOF) withstand
capability

DESCRIPTION

Code(s) &     NC RfG: Articles 13 (1) (b) and 15 (5) (b) (iii)
Article(s)    NC DCC: Articles 28 (2) (k) and 29 (2) (g)
Introduction  NC HVDC: Articles 12 and 39 (3)

NC frame      The requirement aims at ensuring that power generating modules (NC RfG),
              demand units offering Demand Response (DR) services (DCC), HVDC systems
              and DC-connected power park modules shall not disconnect from the network
              up to a maximum rate of change of frequency (df/dt). A large rate of change of
              frequency (RoCoF) may occur after a severe system incident (e.g. system split
              or loss of large generator in a smaller system). The facilities shall remain
              connected to contribute to stabilize and restore the network to normal operating
              states.

              NC RfG and DCC require that the Relevant TSO shall define/require the df/dt
              (RoCoF), which a power generating module (RfG) or a Demand Unit (DCC)
              shall at least be capable of withstanding.

              NC HVDC
                   Article 12: An HVDC system shall be capable of staying connected to
                       the network and operable if the network frequency changes at a rate
                       between ­ 2,5 and + 2,5 Hz/s (measured at any point in time as an
                       average of the rate of change of frequency for the previous 1 sec).
                   Article 39 (3): DC-connected power park module shall be capable of
                       staying connected to the remote-end HVDC converter station network
                       and operable if the system frequency changes at a rate up to +/­ 2 Hz/s
                       (measured at any point in time as an average of the rate of change of
                       frequency for the previous 1 second) at the HVDC interface point of the
                       DC-connected power park module at the remote end HVDC converter
                       station for the 50 Hz nominal system.

              NC DCC, Article 28 (2) (k):
                   Demand units with demand response active power control (...) shall
                       have the withstand capability to not disconnect from the system due to
                       the rate-of-change-of-frequency up to a value specified by the relevant
                       TSO. With regard to this withstand capability, the value of rate-of-
                       change-of- frequency shall be calculated over a 500 ms time frame.

Further info  Further implementation guidance on NC RfG, NC DCC and NC HVDC:
              Supporting documentation of HVDC network code:

                        Network Code for HVDC Connections and DC-connected Power
                            Park Modules - Requirement Outlines (30. April 2014)

              External supporting documents:
                        All Island TSO Facilitation of Renewables Studies(see attachment)

                                                                                                                                      2

ENTSO-E AISBL · Avenue de Cortenbergh 100 · 1000 Brussels · Belgium · Tel + 32 2 741 09 50 · Fax + 32 2 741 09 51 · info@entsoe.eu · www. entsoe.eu
Rate of Change of Frequency (ROCOF) withstand
capability

                    Summary of Studies on Rate of Change of Frequency events on the
                       All-Island System (Aug 2012) (see attachment)

                    Chapter 4 of GB ETYS 2012 diagram on severe reduction in total
                       system inertia 2012 to 2030 (see attachment)

                    Loss of Mains Protection (see attachment)
                    RoCoF Alternative Solutions Technology Assessment (see

                       attachment)
                    Increased Wind Generation in Ireland and Northern Ireland and the

                       Impact on Rate of Change of Frequency1
                    Frequency Stability Evaluation Criteria for the Synchronous Zone

                       of Continental Europe2
                    IGD on High Penetration of Power Electronic Interfaced Power

                       Sources

INTERDEPENDENCIES

Between CNCs

                 The selection of the maximum (df/dt) values to be withstood needs to be chosen
                 by collaboration between the connection codes in order to ensure equitable
                 behaviour of the relevant system users in case of rapid frequency changes
                 bearing in mind the different scope of application of the CNCs. NC HVDC
                 introduces an explicit limit for HVDC systems (2.5 Hz/s), which is above the
                 limit for DC-connected power park modules (2.0 Hz/s). The rationale behind
                 these choices is to have a margin between the capability of HVDC systems and
                 power generating modules to ensure that HVDC systems will disconnect last in
                 order to enable power generating modules and demand units to contribute to
                 stabilize and restore the network to normal operating states as long as possible.

With other NCs

                 COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) .../... of XXX establishing a Guideline
                 on Electricity Transmission System Operation, adopted by the EC on
                 04.05.2016, Article 39 ("Dynamic stability management ")

System           Rate of change of frequency (ROCOF) is the time derivative of the power
characteristics  system frequency (df/dt). This quantity was traditionally of minor relevance for
                 systems with generation mainly based on synchronous generators, because of
                 the inertia of these generators, which inherently counteract to load imbalances
                 and thus limit RoCoF in these cases. It however becomes relevant now during
                 significant load-generation imbalances (caused by disconnection of either large
                 loads or generators, or by system splits), when larger ROCOF values may be
                 observed because of low system inertia caused by (amongst others) disposal of
                 synchronous generation in case of high instantaneous penetration of non-
                 synchronously connected generation facilities.

                 In the absence of any control, inverter-based generation does not possess such
                 inherent characteristics and high inverter penetration could therefore lead to

1 http://www.eirgridprojects.com/site-files/library/EirGrid/Increased Wind Generation in Ireland and Northern Ireland

and the Impact on Rate of Change of Frequency.pdf
2 https://www.entsoe.eu/Documents/SOC%20documents/RGCE_SPD_frequency_stability_criteria_v10.pdf

                                                                                                                                      3

ENTSO-E AISBL · Avenue de Cortenbergh 100 · 1000 Brussels · Belgium · Tel + 32 2 741 09 50 · Fax + 32 2 741 09 51 · info@entsoe.eu · www. entsoe.eu
Rate of Change of Frequency (ROCOF) withstand
capability

higher ROCOF in a power system. The relationship between inverter penetration
and ROCOF is, however, not straightforward, and countermeasures ­ mostly in
the form of control algorithms ­ need to be implemented carefully.

Large ROCOF values may endanger secure system operation because of
mechanical limitations of individual synchronous machines (inherent
capability), protection devices triggered by a particular ROCOF threshold value
or timing issues related to load shedding schemes.

Initial ROCOF is the instantaneous ROCOF just after the disconnection of either

a generator or load from a power system, before any controls become active.

This is theoretically the highest system ROCOF. Its average for an

interconnection of N synchronous loads and generators can be computed as

follows:

                                               |     =        0 
                                                        2 =1, 
                                                =0+

wherein f is the deviation of the frequency f from its nominal value f0, 0+ is the
moment just after disconnection of the load/generation Pk is the lost
generation/load (the machine carrying the index k), and Hi and Si are the inertial
constant and apparent power rating of synchronous machine i, with i ranging
from 1 to N3.

Additional frequency oscillations may occur locally on top of the average
behavior. It should be noted that any system that relies on measuring frequency
and ROCOF will most likely not detect a ROCOF as high as the theoretical
maximum. This is due to the inevitable filtering involved in frequency
measurement4. As a result, ROCOF relays with measurement windows of
several hundred ms may not be triggered if the initial ROCOF breaches their
threshold, but ROCOF is lower subsequently.

To define the RoCoF withstand capability correctly, the characteristics of an
entire synchronous area must be considered. The capability shall be determined
based on analysis of a normative incident for the network concerned. Such a
normative incident could be a defined system split of a large synchronous area
with a significant change of inertia and power imbalance in the resulting
subsystems (e.g. historic events like the Italy blackout in 2003 and the
Continental Europe 3-way split in November 2006). With regard to smaller
synchronous areas with low inertia the loss of the largest power generating
module or HVDC link may define the normative incident instead (e.g. increase
of loss of a single unit up to 1800 MW in GB which would commonly exceed
the until recent existing GB threshold level of RoCoF-based Loss of Mains
(LOM) protection [0.125 Hz/s]5).

Since one main concern is the decrease of system inertia, chosen scenarios
should reflect situations with low inertia, e.g. high share of non-synchronous

3 M. Chan, R. Dunlop, F. Schweppe: "Dynamic Equivalents for Average System Frequency Behaviour Following
Major Disturbances," IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems
4 S. Engelken, C. Strafiel, E. Quitmann: "Frequency Measurement for Inverter-based Frequency Control," in Wind
Integration Workshop, Vienna, 2016
5 Frequency Changes during Large Disturbances WG ppt (see attachments)

                                                                                                                                      4

ENTSO-E AISBL · Avenue de Cortenbergh 100 · 1000 Brussels · Belgium · Tel + 32 2 741 09 50 · Fax + 32 2 741 09 51 · info@entsoe.eu · www. entsoe.eu
Rate of Change of Frequency (ROCOF) withstand
capability

                 renewable generation or high import/export scenarios in case of system splits.
                 For example, on 23rd of August 2015, renewable energy generation in Germany
                 covered 84% of domestic demand6.

                 The RoCoF withstand capability should be assessed on not only the present
                 network but also account for the expected capability that will be required over
                 the asset life of concerned installations accounting for future changes in the
                 network and its demand and generation portfolio. Also the capability of existing
                 connected generators will be taken into account.

                 The RoCoF withstand capability should ideally be provided as a change in
                 frequency over a defined time period which negates short term transients and
                 therefore reflects the actual change in synchronous network frequency).
                 However, in practice this may interfere with protective controls of generators or
                 LOM schemes. Hence, changes relevant to protections, e.g. LOM, using RoCoF
                 but driven by other needs can be considered. Other LOM protection systems
                 (e.g. inter-tripping, satellite protection and load shedding7) might also be
                 considered as alternative measures.

                 Finally, All-Island studies show large df/dt deviation between different bus-bars
                 for the first few cycles, eventually converging to one value, pointing to the
                 importance of the length of the measurement time window for calculation of
                 df/dt8.

Technology       Given the uncertainty on system characteristics and their future evolution, power
characteristics  generating modules need to be robust against changes to the system and shall
                 provide RoCoF withstand capability which accounts for these varying system
                 conditions (e.g. in Ireland, analysis has shown that there will be on average a
                 25% reduction in on-line synchronous inertia by 2020 which has significant
                 implications for the RoCoF)

                 The scenarios which define the minimum RoCoF withstand capability
                 requirements have to reflect technological changes (e.g. share of generation in
                 operation contributing to system inertia) on the network. Hence, it is important
                 that the RoCoF withstand capability requirement accounts for reduced network
                 strength due to higher penetration of converter-connected components like
                 PPMs, HVDC systems, and demand, when defining these scenarios.

                 The identified minimum RoCoF withstand capability shall apply to all
                 installations regardless of technology.

                 Although the inherent capability may vary for different generation technologies,
                 a single minimum RoCoF withstand capability needs to be required to ensure
                 stability of the network. A common value of RoCoF withstand capability of a
                 synchronous area shall not inhibit a TSO requiring further inherent withstand
                 capabilities not to be unreasonably withheld e.g. to manage system operation of
                 parts of its network which may be exposed to a higher risk of islanding.

6 https://energy-charts.de/power_de.htm
7 see attachment on Loss of Mains Protection
8 see attachment (Summary of studies on Rate of Change of Frequency events on the All-Island System)

                                                                                                                                      5

ENTSO-E AISBL · Avenue de Cortenbergh 100 · 1000 Brussels · Belgium · Tel + 32 2 741 09 50 · Fax + 32 2 741 09 51 · info@entsoe.eu · www. entsoe.eu
Rate of Change of Frequency (ROCOF) withstand
capability

                          DNV KEMA studies for Irish TSOs9 also show the dependency of individual
                          unit stability on time window size, which higher df/dt values are bearable by
                          generators if the time window is small enough and vice versa. This again
                          indicates the importance of time window size. In addition, leading power factor
                          of generators will increase their vulnerability to high RoCoF values.

                          According to CENELEC TS50549-1/-2 generating units connected to LV
                          networks with rated current above 16A as well as those connected to MV
                          networks shall be able to operate with rates of change of frequency up to 2,5
                          Hz/s10 11.

                          Loss of Mains RoCoF type protection & settings, although not explicitly part of
                          Article 13 (1) (b) of NC RfG, are covered in Article 14 (5) (b) on Protection
                          Coordination. These requirements should be carefully set by collaboration.
COLLABORATION

TSO ­ TSO

                 Although not explicitly requested in the connection network codes, it would be
                 reasonable to consider collaboration for the RoCoF withstand capability criteria
                 (including) within each synchronous area. This includes the maximum RoCoF
                 value to be withstood, the size of measurement rolling window but also
                 frequency and RoCoF measurement technique. Therefore, TSO ­ TSO
                 collaboration within a synchronous control area would ensure that a minimum
                 RoCoF withstand requirement is applied to all relevant system users.

TSO ­ DSO

                 Based on article 13 (b), a power-generating module shall be capable of staying
                 connected to the network and operate at rates of change of frequency up to a
                 value specified by the relevant TSO, unless disconnection was triggered by rate-
                 of-change-of-frequency-type loss of mains protection. The relevant system
                 operator, in coordination with the relevant TSO, shall specify this rate-of-
                 change-of-frequency-type loss of mains protection.

RSO ­ Grid User

                 The relevant system operator needs to take care, that the parameters of RoCoF
                 withstand capability defined by the relevant TSO are applied to system users.

9 https://thales.entsoe.eu/sites/al/ImplementationGuidances/XIGD09_8.pdf?Web=1

10

https://www.cenelec.eu/dyn/www/f?p=104:110:1376998791841501::::FSP_ORG_ID,FSP_PROJECT,FSP_LANG_ID:1258595,53
799,25

11

https://www.cenelec.eu/dyn/www/f?p=104:110:1376998791841501::::FSP_ORG_ID,FSP_PROJECT,FSP_LANG_ID:1258595,45
870,25

                                                                                                                                      6

ENTSO-E AISBL · Avenue de Cortenbergh 100 · 1000 Brussels · Belgium · Tel + 32 2 741 09 50 · Fax + 32 2 741 09 51 · info@entsoe.eu · www. entsoe.eu
